
Gita 2.39-40


so in the bhagavad-gita is studying the second chapter. we are at a point of inflection, that means the point of change, now the subject matter is going to be changed. Until this point Sri Krishna had taught Gyana yoga, the central teaching of the bhagavad-gita, the doctrine of the Atman that we are not the body, not the mind; we are immortal spirit, pure consciousness. so that's what he had taught and now he's going to talk about karma yoga, how to transform our actions into spiritual practice. in between there was this short interesting section from verse number 31 to 38 where Shri Krishna used a battery of ethical and practical arguments to convince Arjuna to do his duty. that section has come to an end with the 38 verse.


verse  38 
 Jo Jo that o you die or you just for neighbor Papa mo ops 

you see regarding pleasure and pain suka-dukkha alike, gain and loss labha-alabha alike, victory and defeat jaya-ajaya alike, prepare yourself for doing your duty. in this way you will not incur sin.

 just a note that these terms are causally connected. if you read closely you'll see pleasure and pain in the battle. that is going to fight it comes out of whether he has gained or lost. if he gains, if we are the winners then we feel happy. if we lose then we feel dejected, a pain. and what is gained in this context? it is victory in battle. what is loss in this context? it is defeat in battle, so look at the sequence: suka pleasure is caused by lava, that is gain, and lava means Jaya that means victory. dukkha sorrow is caused by a lava that is loss, loss is a Jaya that is not victory or defeat in battle. so it's actually causally connected. 

but what he is saying is be serene in regard to these. how can you be serene in regard to this? only in one way, if you are doing it as the right thing to do. see, if you're doing it for victory, which Arjuna was, which is a common sense that when you're fighting or you're taking up any action, what do you want to get out of it? if you want worldly success, which for Arjuna meant victory, that meant a revenge on the evildoers and so forth. taking back what is rightfully belongs to him and to his brothers. 

but shri krishna urges him to give up all of that. see in between what has happened is Arjuna came to the battlefield with all these armies for the purpose to get what is rightfully his and to defeat the evil doers. now when he sees the terrible cost of that, truly like any good person, he feels it's not worth it. I will gain something but at what cost my relatives? this is a terrible thing to do. and he's right, that's a terrible thing to do. and if the thing is his personal gain.

but what sri krishna points out is that it's not really a question of your personal gain, you are in this great dilemma because you are doing it for yourself. Although in a legitimate way, in a righteous manner, nothing bad about it but still.. yourself was central to it all. you're doing it for yourself. but now think about it this way: “I am NOT doing it for myself, I am doing it for the welfare of the kingdom, I am doing it because it is what I am supposed to do, my duty in this situation”. in that case it makes a huge difference, does it not? yes it does. if you are doing the right thing, and you are very convinced that you're doing the right thing then whether you succeed or not is not so germane, is not so important, if you succeed. you'll be happy I did the right thing. and if I succeeded in doing the right thing I'm happy that I did the right thing, but if I failed or it didn't work out, it’s still all right. I am unhappy but still it's not as terrible as I fought a war entirely for my selfish purposes and created such havoc and I failed it's all round failure. but here he has done the model thing, the ethical thing, the good thing and maybe who knows might have failed, even then it's all right. 

so he says [no Papa my ops] you see you will not incur sin. do it with selfish motives then whatever you do is sinful, you're doing it for yourself. so if you win, it's still sin; if you lose, it's still sinful. so the importance of the mental attitude in action has been pointed out here.

but we had done this. now comes the switch in subject thirty-ninth verse 
please repeat after me a shot a vita Sankey a shot a Vita Sankey boo do Gateway mom Shri no boo do gateway mom Sri no Buddha yocto Yaya Budhia Yocto Yaya but karma Bandhan prophecy karma Bandhan prahasta 

see the teaching about the self has been given, teaching about the Atman has been given to you, now listen to the teaching about action, karma yoga, being equipped with which, being endowed with which, you will transcend the bondage created by action.

I'll repeat again: you have heard the teaching about Atman, Who am I? What is the reality? About our [sim] myself you heard that. now listen to the teaching about action, karma yoga. what will that do? by practicing that you will transcend the bondage created by action.

so it has to be unpacked and what he will do from now on is going to unpack it. one question here: the teaching about the self, Atman, one might ask I am [Bronwyn Zidane and Rupa her shivoham] that was the teaching. I am Brahman, I am pure consciousness, the world is an appearance, the central teaching of advaita vedanta taught to [amma] see, that thou art. that has been given. so what else is needed? what is this now? why does this topic come up at all? what's the point? the point is this: first of all even after giving that teaching, it often does not work. there might be a rare person who becomes illumined being told that you are the Atman, you are the witness consciousness. “alright done! thank you very much” Geeta over half the second chapter and the whole Gita is finished. but Arjuna, like the rest of us, has many questions and many other problems. it doesn't straightaway work. philosophy itself being realized in life, becoming enlightened directly by the teaching, it might work but for a very few. for most of us, we have many other problems, so those things have to be dealt with then. there are other issues involved. I realize I'm the Atman but what about this life? I have got things to do in this life, there are people in my life, there’s this action, there's my life to lead. how do I connect it to my spirituality? are there two things, one is spiritual life and another one is secular life? if there are two things, and that's what happens to most of us, spiritual life is Vedanta Society classes on Friday evening seven-thirty and rest of it secular life, the spiritual life is going to lose and lose badly. why? because the demands of secular life are so tough, you have a family to look after, you have a job to hold, you have health problems, financial problems, community, social, political problems, so many pressures on life that spirituality is nice, a talk now, a little bit of mindfulness sometimes, a little this and that and good, but the moment some pressure comes we immediately start dealing with that and spirituality takes the backseat. that which was meant to solve all the problems in our life, it doesn't help us in crisis. not only that it sometimes becomes an additional problem. to-do list, so many things to do and also a Gita class on top of that. usually the Gita class is the first to be sacrificed. 

I remember the difference between karma and meditation as a senior monk telling a novice in our ashram. there as novices we all had duties, so that novice’s duty was to sell books in the bookshop, he has to maintain the bookshop. the senior monk was telling the novice “I hope you get up early and meditate. see my boy there's nobody who's going to tell you to do that. the bookshop will make you work because people will line up and if you don't open the bookshop they're going to complain to the senior monk about you. look at the [broad burma cherry] the novice is so lazy, hasn't opened the bookshop on time, it's not clean, it's not kept nicely, this book is not available and so and so forth. so the world will extract work from you. as far as your external activities are concerned let it be karmayoga, let it be just your ordinary duties in life. the world will extract it from you, will make you perform. but you and God is sitting quietly in the early morning darkness and meditating on God”. God is an easy boss apparently, he's not going to hold you accountable. you don't turn up for meditation “all right it's your loss”. God has nothing to say, it's going to sit quietly, so you're going to meditate or not meditate, there it depends on you that often happens.

 that becomes the problem, if you split up spiritual life and secular life. so spiritualizing the whole of life is important. spiritualizing the whole of life is important because I often hear this question, I talk a lot about on [Twitter] Vedanta and people like it but what common question, the most common question is “Swami I have heard the talks, I read the books, now what?” if a [greater] Vedanta works as it is supposed to work , [it] won't even ask the question now what. but because we asked the question shri krishna has a new section beginning now on karma yoga.. now this. 

this is what we're going to do there's a word here [- - imam shri knew] in sanskrit - the word is [para karana with Jada thumb] which means to differentiate between two sections of the same chapter so one section is over, now we are beginning another section. Gyana yoga is over, Karma Yoga is starting now. [to Imam Shin do gong to amounting to a few]

before we start a few words about the terms used here. yes you might ask your using words like Advaita and Vedanta and Ghani yoga, where is Krishna used such words? so the Krishna uses the words Sankyo, now this is a very old use of the word Sankhya. Sankyo means knowledge, here knowledge about the Atman specifically, knowledge about the Atman. the other meaning of the word Sankhya we know is a system of philosophy, one of the six systems of Orthodox Hindu philosophy, jnana rachet sheikah Sankhya yoga, yes you heard correctly yoga yoga is among many meanings of yoga [101] is the philosophy of yoga, yoga purva mimamsa, tara mimamsa: six systems that [otero] mimamsa. the later mimamsa is the technical name for vedanta, what we call the [atlanta]. so Sankhya is one of the systems of philosophy but here it's that's not what is meant when krishna says i have taught you Sankhya. I've taught you knowledge about the Atman, the philosophy of Sankhya is also about the Atman, about this self, but here specifically he means I've given you knowledge about the real nature of the self. till now yoga but the yoga to [Imam Sri] no now listen to the teaching about yoga. what yoga is referring to here now there were karma yoga so yoga here refers to karma yoga so the if you I said Gyana yoga and karma yoga two sections in Krishna's words Sankhya and car and Yoga Yoga means karma yoga and Sankhya means Gianni yoga in our terminology there is a very ancient saying they don't know who said it but it'd be beautiful and very important saying for our spiritual life. [sank as among Yanam nasty yoga yoga cimbalom nasty] there is no knowledge like the knowledge of the self, Sankhya and there is no power like the power of spiritual practice, yoga in life. what do you need? you need knowledge and power, you need to know and the power to do that knowledge. our real nature comes from adwaita Vedanta [Organ]a yoga and what you have to do bhakti Yoga, karma yoga and Dianna Raja over those are the three all right being equipped with this knowledge.

 what so Arjuna might ask, so what will happen to me if I get that this knowledge? you will overcome the bondage created by action. karma otherwise creates bondage, keeps us in samsara. how can we use that very Karma to escape from samsara, to get freedom from samsara. so I mean []vaikunta say that you cannot run away from samsara, you must learn to work the machine. one must learn to work the machine so that the Machine sets you free. if you try to run, they will be crushed by that machine; learn to work the machine, operate the machine, so that it sets you free. how do we operate the machinery of life so that we are liberated from samsara, we get salvation, enlightenment, moksha, Nirvana? that will be the teaching.

 now another point. see these are the points which commentators bring out, it may not occur to us but they think very deeply. if this was the purpose to teach gana yoga and then karma yoga so after completing the Gyana yoga teaching which was in verse [30] up to 30 should have straight started with this what was that between 31 and 38, what was that? that's because, according to one commentator, when we are going to do karma yoga, that is spiritualizing, my Karma first of all one must know. []cut off via Karma that is what am I going to do and when spiritualize it correct. but what is it that I'm supposed to do? what is it that I'm not supposed to do? So from 31 to 38 krishna has clearly pointed out, Arjuna knew this but it needed to be said - what is the duty? actually, what should Arjuna do, what should he not do ? []it's a beautiful of teaching these teachers Krishna Buddha Christ mama Shankara all of them, and of course Ramakrishna, there were master teachers if you just look at the pedagogy involved the way they teach the communication. if you notice in verses 31 to 38 he stated what should be done first. second, he stated what should not be done and finally concluded again with what should be done. in between he discussed the advantages of doing what should be done and the disadvantages of not doing his duty. those were discussed and he draws it to a conclusion in the end by saying once again stating what he should do.

 I was in a discussion group discussing how to communicate with children. modern psychology, so first you have to acknowledge the situation: this is the problem and this is what you are saying, so an observation, acknowledgement. then you have to express a feeling. Krishna does that again and again. you'll notice how he proclaims that I love you, I am your well-wisher again and again. here he expresses it's not a neutral teaching from a distance because I am your well-wisher, nobody loves you more than me, therefore I am saying it and then express our request. this is what you should do and keep the person's freedom into intact. having said all this you're still free I'm not putting any pressure on you. at the end of eight 18 chapters what does Krishna say? the last thing he says, is your choice. he thought ah guru after having listened to all this now do as you will, I'm done but you are free to do whatever you want. ramakrishna also says that jaya thicker. i'll do it again. actually when a jedi car tie the knowledge of advaita to the hem of your cloth and then do as you will. that means base yourself at non-dualism philosophy, let that light up your mind and then do what you want what you will. but you will winds do whether you want to be a yogi or a devotee or a gurney or engaged in dynamic action for the welfare of the world whatever you want to do. so ramakrishna says that the idea tie kora literally means do whatever you want but it's it can often be used in Bengali as a kind of a lot of a scolding mom's often you use it the exasperated moms say to children or do whatever you want to do “I give up so JIT icaro”. I remember the fight is a funny incident where there was this senior Swami in an ashram scolding a young monk who is a very innocent but but apt to exasperate the senior monk. sometimes the muck the finally the senior monk said whatever are you doing what is this you're doing and the young monk said didn't swami don't you know what see Ramakrishna said try the knowledge of advaitha to the hem of your cloth and do whatever you like he said oh so you have tied the knowledge of advaitha to your clock and the young monk replied I am trying to do a part of it at least half of it do whatever you like so I'm doing that I am practicing that part I am practicing that part.

 so first Shri Krishna determines what has to be done in the verses 31 to 38 now how do you do it spiritually. this is your duty now, how do you do it spiritually, that's going to start now. there's one more thing I need to say before I go on. notice how karma yoga is being positioned here. Karma Yoga is being positioned as a means, as a practice, to enable you to realize gana yoga I am the Atman in order to realize that in my life I need to do these practices to prepare myself so the the inner text the subtext is what we are going to teach you will not give you enlightenment or freedom directly but it will prepare you for the higher knowledge of the Earthmen repeat that Karma Yoga is a practice to gain yoga as a supplement to as a step to gianna yoga the commentator here sridhar swami this is one one commentator but this is typical he says oopah system Gyana yoga no person Haran taught siddhanam Karma Yoga impressed ot having concluded the teaching about jana the means - that is now being introduced Karma Yoga is a means to that is being introduced but this is a maneuver done by the commentators 

Krishna never clearly says that it is a means to Karma Yoga is a means to gain Yoga. later on you see Swami Vivekananda says, each of them independently can take you there but the traditional commentators Shankara for example and Twitter days they put Gannett knowledge at the top and others leading up to that. So I have said this earlier but this is the right time to say it and I'll have an occasion to repeat it again. What is the framework? Keep this in mind the framework of spiritual practice, let us call it the matrix of spiritual practice. what are we to do if that is the question in spiritual life. to become enlightened? to attain moksha, liberation, salvation? What are we to do according to Vedanta? here is the answer: make a matrix in your mind three by three in your mind. three columns, the first column is problem, the second column is solution and the third column is method. Vedanta tells us you are Brahman, you are pure being, immortal, beyond any suffering, you are pure awareness, beyond the problems of the body, []be all forever perfect, before ever beyond the problems of the mind, and stops. and we are left sort of scratching our heads that doesn't quite help me. why doesn't seem to be a living reality to me? it doesn't seem I've heard it. I'm not sure I understand what it means and it certainly doesn't seem to be a lived reality to me. it's not realized yet, it's not IT! I'm not awake to that reality. what you're talking about so problem. you said it but I don't realize it. I don't know. it not knowing, not realizing, so the problem the first problem is Agyana, ignorance, first problem is our agyana, ignorant. what I'm telling now is absolutely key to understanding bhagavad-gita from the Advaita Vedanta perspective, so you have to keep it in mind. many questions from now on can be answered. I might just say refer to the matrix tell me the answer you can easily get the answer yourself. so what is the matrix: first problem is ignorance or []gyana in Sanskrit. what is the solution? solution is knowledge. the solution for any problem any ignorant is knowledge, gianna in sanskrit. here I'll point out something which seems obvious but still good to keep in mind. knowledge removes ignorant provided there are two conditions: the object and locus of knowledge and ignorance are the same. that sounds really difficult. no it isn’t. it's really simple, it just that philosophers love to make simple things difficult. what does it mean? suppose I am ignorant, the question will be ignorant of what? I'm ignorant of physics. ah so I have ignorant of physics. what is the object of []magnetons? what is it that I do not know? physics. where is this ignorance? in me, the student. the student is ignorant of physics. now knowledge will be required to remove this ignorance. remember knowledge must have the same []exam objected same locus means place residence which means what kind of knowledge is required and where is that knowledge required. knowledge of mathematics or knowledge of Sanskrit will not remove my ignorance of physics. knowledge of physics will remove my ignorance of physics because the object of knowledge and object of ignorance must be the same one. my professor’s knowledge of physics will not remove my ignorance of physics. that knowledge has to come in me, it has to arise in me. I must get the feeling that I must know it in that case the knowledge is here ignorance was here that knowledge when it comes here it will remove the ignorance here. so ignorant about Atman, about the self, who I really am, that can be removed only by knowledge of []Sanskrit gita knowledge of Atman, and my gurus knowledge is not enough, Sri Ramakrishna and Vivekananda knowledge is not enough to remove my ignorance, it must come here. they can help me but it must ultimately come here, I must realize it. so knowledge removes ignorance gyana removes agyana. Problem is ignorance, solution is knowledge. method? how do I get that knowledge? shravana monana nidhidyashana. and this is gana yoga. shravana monona needed. T asana literally hearing. reasoning meditating hearing reasoning meditating. hearing here means systematically studying Vedanta, which means coming to class, listening carefully, thinking about it, asking questions. congratulations you are already practicing Jana Yoga! yes the moment you have started shravana, listening to vedanta, and thinking, applying the mind to it, we're already practicing. in fact this is the first step and you know which is the most important step in there in ghana yoga the path of knowledge, it is this listening. not the meditation afterwards. they say []Shravan arte of organum bye-bye what you here alone knowledge comes. reasoning and meditation are to remove obstructions in knowledge. there are lot of explanations to be done there I will not go into it. so method is listening, I've been studying, reasoning and meditation one after another in sequence so now you have the first row of the matrix: problem ignorance of the Atman, solution knowledge of the Atman, how do I get that knowledg? listen reason meditate 

[]shaman a man and he did the asana now we again back to scratching our heads yeah well I've been coming to class for sometime, you have come for two years now I've been coming to class for twenty years and I don't see enlightenment coming out anywhere close to it. what is the problem? now the second tier, the second rope, is what in sanskrit is called []wick shape, the mind is scattered, it is restless, it is unable to absorb this teaching. clarity does not dawn, focus does not come. 

 we hear it, even when we apply ourselves to it the result is: we say I get some kind of intellectual knowledge that is the sign that clarity has not yet come so []Wyck shape a scattered mind. you see what's the problem? I have gone through your recommendation, I have done hearing and reasoning and meditation to some extent at least, for a long time it has not worked. now the problem is why has it not worked or why is it not working. many people keep coming to class for years and years and they have so many notebooks and nowadays you know hard disks full of talks and things like that, so what is happening? restless mind! restless mind is the problem. solution? Concentration and focus. 

it's a huge problem these days - lack of attention, restlessness, hyper restlessness, especially among kids. Daniel Goldman who became very famous writing EQ, about the book on emotional intelligence, not one book but one after another. the latest book he has written is called focus, it's about concentration. so anyways the same problem, exactly the same problem: inability to hold on and focus on, and not just in Vedanta, in any sphere of life. to do anything great, to make any kind of breakthrough you need focus, you need to hold on more than talent. this bearing down upon it to hold on to it something and seriously []plug away at it for months and years and years together, that is more important than being talented or being very brilliant. like this American saying “a big shot is a little shot who keeps shooting”. focus, the ability to hold on! I have a friend who is a mathematician, tremendous focus, now he was saying that this is what is important for to be a good mathematician. it's not really important to be very particularly brilliant you need talent. so I said then why don't they do it, I mean it could have more people. just you need to keep doing it. he said they won't, that's it! they don't, they get distracted by mobile phones and movies and socializing and so and so forth. 

I remember going to in India, this IITs are very well known engineering colleges. I went to another engineering college to give a talk to the students there and I was talking to the students. it's not of the rank of the IITs, a little a couple of steps down in the ranking and I remember what I told the students based on my observation. I said look whenever I go to a college or university I visit the library (I love libraries, I do). that here also whenever I go to a college or university and you have fantastic libraries here when I said here is the difference between you guys and that elite engineering college here. I find we have extraordinary excellent you know compute a shiny computer departments and labs and a beautiful library and that's what they have in the IIT is - but here is the difference. it's not a difference in their in your facilities it's not so much of a difference in your faculty the difference is this when I went to the library just before the talk I'd gone to visit the library so very nice where are the kids oh they were all gone home the computer department rows and rows of shiny new computers empty nobody's there - boys and girls are sitting where are they they have gone out in all the socializing gone back home or something like that so when I went to the class which I was supposed to address I said when I went to that College which you guys look up to I went and sat in the library to read with the with the students there and they have a group of students reading then I went to my room to do some work and you know took a bath and had lunch and I came back and there was amazed to see that eight hours later the same students group of students was sitting around me evidently at it exactly the same way which they have been eight hours earlier and I told the students there in that College though that elite1 oh I'm so impressed how these kids in this day and age they've got so much focus and they said Swami you are visiting in in the lean hours that means if you come during exam time you will find the kids they get get into the library to study the moment you know early in the morning it's open throughout the day and they are in the library throughout the day throughout the evening throughout that night next morning they go to the washroom in the library wash their faces and go straight to the examination house 24 hours without a break no coffee break no lunch no lunch no dinner nothing sometimes they do that so I said to those kids this is the difference so as the professor so if it's that why don't they do it they won't they won't unfortunately it's not possible everybody doesn't have that []Kepler, that kind of capacity to hold on. 

now focus is important. if distraction is the problem []Vic shaper then the solution is a []car greater concentration and the method is meditation []ooop asana meditation who pass on as meditation worship meditation then people will say back to scratching your head again I you know I took initiation and I have been practicing meditation for 20 years and []Asians not particularly good I still am so distracted and what is the problem? now third tier, the last, and []promises the last year of problems we are going to complete the matrix now the last tier of problems impurity of mind. I should the []jitter in Sanskrit []Cheeta mala mala means dirt, chitta mala impurity of mind. what is the solution? purity of mind, []jitter should []dress a no-brainer. purity of mind.. how is that accomplished? what is the method? karma yoga! this is what is coming in you karma yoga doing what needs to be done with a spiritual attitude spiritualizing your day-to-day activity.

 now you have the matrix let me draw it again for error in your mind's eye just draw it again first column problem so in the first row you have got ignorant, solution: knowledge, method: hearing reasoning meditating gana yoga. second row - problem: distracted mind Sanskrit big shaper; solution: focused mind Sanskrit a car Greta, method: []who pass on our worship meditation; third row: why even meditation is not successful? third []rope impure mind system Allah impurities in the mind; solution: pure mind chitta shoddy, method: one powerful method  - karma yoga! so now you have the matrix. with a purified mind when you sit down to meditate, meditation is immediately powerful and effective. with a concentrated and purified mind when you approach the teaching of the Atman there is a breakthrough, you intuitively grasp. “oh it is so I am the unaffected witness consciousness []tadhana andrew baja shivoham, I am pure awareness pure bliss it is I don't have to become that it becomes very clear and that is realization enlightenment both he whatever you call it drama”. that happens! so this is the whole spiritual journey.

but again this is one framework remember this is the framework according to Advaita Vedanta Shankara. if you ask a teacher of bhakti they'll say oh no no no no not like this, something else. 

yes pure mind is no negative thoughts, no no no it's not that it is a preponderance of pure thoughts. you know what will happen is spiritual life becomes desirable and nice, and not so much of a struggle. you like meditating, you like service, you like reading the Gita or the Bible or whatever it is; spiritual life becomes desirable, nice, interesting and you're able to do it. that is the sign of purity. of not that once in a while []and disturbance greed reactions will not come, of course they will come. how do you deal with it? when they come, some people get swept away, some people get caught up in it, all right. I'll give you the sign of []Chitra should be what will happen is this over time. what will happen is the frequency of these upsets irritation outburst depression inability to control myself the frequency will go down. and the second thing which will happen will be the intensity of these negativities will get reduced, with go down. so earlier I used to fly into a rage now I'm mildly irritated; earlier I used to be angry almost every other day, now every other week. and the recovery time will go down, earlier if I am angry in the morning it'll take me 3 days to cool down, now if I am angry now next moment I'm alright. they were []saying shadow Raja laid down the anger of a monk should be like a line drawn in flowing water, as soon as you draw it it goes away. it's not that anger will not be. Swami Vivekanada said a fool cannot get angry the wise one does not get angry.

 so yes this is a monk in Chennai he told me this this is a good way to measure your progress in spiritual life. it happens over time, it is gentle even without any kind of specific spiritual practice. this is what is called maturity, emotional maturity is this thing. the frequency of problems, the intensity of problems and the recovery time from the problems they all go down. or what []years you will notice it is happening yes yes and now []does do you lose the ability to focus []yes and no. if you do not keep in training, you will lose these abilities. so I have seen students who became academicians or researchers, they retain the ability to focus because they are focusing. a student who goes into managing a multinational corporation with a hundred and everything all are, a busy mom so very difficult to focus on one thing because half a dozen things are calling for your attention. I saw a cartoon, it was a philosophy journal, the theme was time, so the cartoon was on one side is the old man with a []side standing it's written “father time” - you know he's looking brooding father time, old man - and the next picture is of this lady, she's got a handbag and two kids hanging onto a hand and a []bun the kid on the []prime and racing along, she looks harried, it says “mother not enough time”. father time and mother not enough time. 

so sometimes you are put in a situation where it's difficult to focus but even they had noticed the person who can focus can get much more done much better than the person who cannot focus. and these practices help you to maintain and develop your power of focus, meditation. it does help the ability to sit still and hold on to one thought for a while. that is the very essence of concentration, a focus. Now there's so much emphasis on mindfulness, it's a huge thing in USA. now children are being taught mindfulness, not just for focus, for calming down, for []distressing, but for focus also, for awareness. 

By the way should have noticed the two meditations in the matrix[] yes oh you noticed good somebody's noticing. yes there's a difference there's a big difference, the meditation which is done in the first one that is called []needd asana vedantic meditation, the meditation which is done in earlier in the second row that is the yogic meditation that is []dianna or []rope asana. now there is a difference, I will not go into that but if you want I will refer you to a []parochial booty I have a series of lectures towards the end of those lectures in []a production of booty from verses 101 onwards. Shankar Acharya talks about vedantic meditation, that is the []ro1 kind of meditation but he also contrasts it with the yogic meditation. the purpose of a the Vedantic meditation is to realize that I am Brahman, while the purpose of yogic meditation is to develop the power of focus. I'll leave it at that but there is a difference in principle there and in practice also.

this is the framework and we will use this throughout our study of Gita. but remember this is just a framework, if you did come to some other spiritual tradition they may have a different framework. the bhakti traditions, for example, they will never say karma yoga then []OPA sauna and then Jana Yoga. []no no work the alone beginning middle and end, bhakti devotion you want purity of mind but the devotion will give it to you. you want focus? love! what gives you more focus than love? and you want knowledge? love of God will give you knowledge! ultimately God will give you knowledge so all will come from love. are they wrong? no not wrong, that's another another way of looking at it. but Advait Vedanta the approach is like this.

 all right having said this let us go on 


I am NOT going too much into this []karma Bandhan prahasta see, by following karma yoga you will overcome the bondage of karma. what does that mean? Krishna himself explains “[]40 my hobby Cremona Asti main hobby Cremona Asti Pratibha unibit dirty practice alone a bit dirty so album a pleasure Monsieur so album pure Monsieur trotty Mahato by art therapy mahoto by art”. in this practice karma yoga, in contrast to worldly action (family job whatever) it is in contrast to that worldly karma. this karma yoga when you're doing the same action but when you change your attitude and make it to Karma Yoga what will happen? there is no wastage, you begin something and do not complete it.. is it that you have to write it off, total loss? no whatever you do, it goes towards your spiritual progress. if that's what you're interested in spiritual progress then []pretty of []Ayane with deity, there is no opposite effect or no bad effect. then so []”welcome appreciated Monsieur try at a Mahato Fiat” whatever little you practice gives result it protects, []uses from great fear, the fear of birth then death, and the fear of samsara. even a little bit of practice, not that you have to become a Vivekananda and Buddha and then only you get the result.. oh no then very very few people would practice it, but to the extent that we are spiritual, to the extent that you pray, to the extent that you meditate, to the extent that you study and think about it, you will get peace of mind, you will get joy, you will get strength. I have seen many times people who say that “oh I've been doing with meditation or []violent or something, Buddhism for a long time. []not I haven't really gotten much out of it. I mean I have not really advanced and so many problems still remain”. and when I say “all right, stop it, then give it up”. “oh no no no I can't do that” in most cases they will say, “that is the most precious thing in my life now”. “ah then how can you say that you have not got anything?”.

I remember when I became a monk as a novice, three days afterwards I told another monk, not a very senior monk (we were too scared to approach the very senior ones), a fairly middling level monk. I said “oh nothing is happening, I mean I'm not progressing”. three days into the monastic life! and he shot back with something I'll never forget, he said “okay go back home”. I said “no I can't do that. I can't admit it, really could not imagine going back home”. then he said look “that place you call home for 23 years has within three days become unthinkable for you. is that not progress?”. it's incredible progress, not that it's become very bad, it's exactly what it was earlier but now you have got a taste of something for which there's no comparison, you would rather keep on doing this. I remember some of those things with the early lessons we learned really worthwhile. I'll share a couple: the first day it was a monastery []at the school attached to it. it's in ramakrishna mission with their []pd ochre so third or fourth day when i was there one of the monks took me to the school to teach the kids and he introduced me to the teachers. the teachers there, they're some of the monks teach and there are other teachers who are paid teachers you know. like it teaches in any school any high school but the monks and the teachers work together. so when I was introduced here is this young boy who has come to be a monk and he's going to work in the school for the time being and the Swami was introducing me said he has got these qualifications, these degrees and things like that, and one senior teacher, an old gentleman said “ah we are lucky to have him! []then God's a qualified by, we're lucky to have him”, and immediately the Swami said, correcting him “no he is lucky to be here”. look at that correction, do you see what I mean? consider it the greatest blessing of your life that you are accepted into this holy order, we are not lucky to have you but you are lucky to be here and I said it's just a great lesson to learn for the rest of my life. there was one day I think I was sweeping the road beneath building or something, and one senior, not a senior monk he was just senior to me just a few years more than me, he was going from there to the main monastery. He was leaving and I was going to take his place and by leaving he left me with a little bit of advice. he said, look the sweeping you're doing, suppose they tell you all the rest of your life, in your monastic life, the only thing that you'll ever be good for is just sweeping this road? and I don't have the []emotional, I guess, “why” I said “it's perfectly all right with me. I'm ready to keep sweeping this broom on the road for the rest of my life just if you let me stay here”. then he was so happy, he was not a young man little a few years older than me, he said that's the attitude! if you have that attitude you'll be a good monk.

 now so these are this is the spirit of karma yoga. yeah and we saw so much of this all right []”Neha Vikram on our show Asti” worldly action, if you begin it you must complete it, you can't sow the seeds to have a farmer can't do that and then you have to you have to prepare the field and sow the seeds and then water []rate, irrigate it and then put fertilizers and stuff and supplements and so on. and then harvest the crops. but suppose somebody says um maybe I'll sow the seeds rest I will not do, so won't I get 1/4 of the crops? no you won't, it'll be a total loss. you start producing a new gadget, you invented it and then you start producing it. but if you don't produce it and take it all the way to the consumer you won't get a penny back. until you complete a world reaction no results are there. now that applies for religious actions also which are done for worldly purposes. so the puja which is done for a particular, it's called []Sakura Appa sana Sakuma karma, karma done with desire, “I want money”, so many things. the first part of the Vedas are full of what are called []against sacrifices, fire sacrifices, basically you're bribing God to help you []hurt. I mean I'm putting it in a very general sense[] you “I offered this and I want this in life” what do you want something in this life? let the rains be good to us, let disease not touch our community, what persons would have hoped for 2000 or 3000 years ago, protect us from our enemies, and so on so forth. now all of those rituals,this is a saying that you must perform them properly. they must be performed just like any work you do in the world, they must be done perfectly then only the result is expected. do it half, may half-assedly, no we don't get anything but in contrast to that, he says Karma Yoga for liberation, for enlightenment, for love of God, whatever you do is not ruined. even if you don't bring it to a completion, you chant the name of God a thousand times - good, you chant it ten times - still good, chant it once - still good. not that you will do it half-assedly, the puja but if it's an offering of love they say why go near the small defects in the puja God does not look at those because it's an offering of love you don't want anything in return you just offering it out of love. you want you said no I want purification of mine. didn't you just say result is purification that's all right the desire for God is not we counted among desires. so Ramakrishna put it this way and somebody asked Swami you say you're giving up desires to become a []monkey bus give up designs but do you want God or not? yes then you have a desire. shri ramakrishna has answered to that: the desire for God is not to be counted among results. he says, the sugar candy is not to be counted among other candy because candy causes acidity and is it acid reflux and sugar candy is something that destroys acidity. you have to be a Bengali to understand that. I think so []mystery yes so that is not to be counted rock candy rock candy that is not to be counted among sweets though it tastes sweet so this desire for God wipes out all worldly desire and takes you beyond worldliness so that is not to be counted as a worldly desire. 

so there is no loss on this path that's the point number one number one was it takes you beyond the bondage of karma. that was in 39th verse and these three there: is no loss there is no negative effect and also a little bit of practice saves you from great fear. these are the explanations of that one, the first one there is no negative effect side effect it's a but []the avaya is an adverse effect an unintended consequence these there are there are actually forces you can call them psychic forces beyond our ordinary knowledge and these whether the Vedic fire sacrifices or the tantric practices they play with these forces in order to get certain certain results in our worldly life. now if you're not careful, it can be damaging like a powerful medicine, if you don't take it in proper dosage if you don't take it with proper diet it can have unintended side effects. sometimes the side effects are much worse and much dangerous. can land you up in hospital. the same way, many religious acts are there which are prescribed in the Vedas for worldly benefits and if you don't do it properly it can lead to harm. so immediately in the mind of the Vedic practitioners the question was: this thing you're going to teach, karma yoga, this Gita []gana our meditation Karma, all this you're teaching, do they have any side effects, negative effects adverse effects if I don't do it well? no they don't! there's no []cite that no harmful consequence to it whatsoever anything that you do for spirituality for the love of God, for God realization.

 put it which see I'm using two kinds of words self realization or spirituality or the way I say or God realization means the same thing in advaitha vedanta you can say both ways. they have knows no negative consequences no negative consequences there is a story I it is traditionally told so there's.

I'll tell that story and end here. the story of []Britt restaura when you're talking about negative consequences. it's as an illustration always that the traditional teacher will tell the story but we have had many Indian children didn't know the story I knew it from those emerge it []tregurtha comics. the story goes like this: in the ancient days of the wars between the demons and the gods, the sage []washed out his son whose name was []surprised vishwaroopa, who was also a sage. he was killed by mistake by Indra, the king of the gods, and []Twista was furious with the king of the gods Indra. and so he wanted to destroy Indra the king of the gods, so he performed this elaborate Vedic sacrifice, this kind of work with a specific worldly desire or otherworldly desire, the desire was the demon who will be born of this sacrifice, will be manifested by this a supernatural force, a terrifying demon that will be powerful enough to kill the king of the gods. so there's an elaborate procedure to generate this force, the demon. now the story goes the mantra which is to be chanted while the fire sacrifice is going on in []Russia Thrun what does one in the []English octoroon what does well it really means let the enemy of Indra develop or grow or manifest now there is a specific way of chanting vedic mantras where you have to put stress on the intonation it is connected to the way of chanting and grammar in a very intricate way we will not go into the details but suffice it for this much if you say in Russia true but what does wha it means let the one who will destroy the enemy of Indra who will destroy Indra let let that one come out this is what the the sage wanted. but now the gods knew that our King is in danger so they conspired and the goddess of learning Saraswathi manifested on the tongue of the the rishi the moment he was about to chant. at that time the tongue twisted, so she made it so that the rashid chanted it wrongly. instead of putting the emphasis on the last syllable in []russia through he said in []russia through what thus were let he who will be destroyed by indra let him be manifested the meaning changes immediately. depending on where you put the stress. [because why again there is oh there is two types of Sanskrit okay I will not go into details grammatical conjunctions] []samatha with that such teeth are purified Purusha and baristas so if you on depending on pronunciation the the grammatical conjunction changes and so the meaning changes and so he made a mistake and what he wanted happened a terrible demon came up and went out and fought against the gods and defeated the gods and defeated indra, i think he swallowed in []drawer something like that or things like that. now what happened was Indra had gone to the great sage Dadhichi, so story within story, and they said that only a weapon the Thunderbolt (in fact Indra is called the wielder of the Thunderbolt) []Raja the Thunderbolt can destroy this demon nothing else can destroy this demon so what is the Thunderbolt means. so you can see Indra is also the god of rain and thunder so what what he uses when there's a thunderstorm that is interest in the Thunderbolt. so where will this Thunderbolt be produced. will []boy make it or not drop or Lockheed? laughs. so it is the sage Dadhichi the most righteous among sages, his bones will are enough above are required to make this Thunderbolt. so it is a person who has led a life of perfectly ethical and moral life so they go how can you ask this we want your bones and the sage she was so unattached to his worldly existence he said all right I shall go I'm going to give up my body. []India yogic meditation it sat in meditation and left the body you can use the bones and so they manufactured the Thunderbolt out of the bones and Indra using the Thunderbolt, finally killed the demon Vitra. so from then on Indra that king of the Gods is known as the wielder of the []budget of a leader of the Thunderbolt and so on .so the story this is like that but the point here is that the wrong pronunciation led to a wrong - absolutely opposite effect so for all worldly kinds even though our religious ritual but if your desires are worldly then you have to be very careful of how you perform the ritual but for karma yoga, bhakti yoga, gana yoga whatever you do for the love of God all right this the specifics don't count so much. 

in which it is a nice fable practically big thing I remember our the head of our monastery the one we were trained under he taught us these beautiful lessons he said “it's not the work that you do, that matters; it's what the work does to you, that matters”. what did you get out of it, not what did you do in the world outside. 



so sometimes we've as in the enthusiastic newcomers we made mistakes he was not worried about that he would see that did we try did we do it with the proper attitude and did we learned from it that's all sometimes mushroom which didn't have much money it suffered there was somebody who you know a biogas plant and some things so one of the Bromwich eyes was in charge of that he messed up and the thing failed and the ashram lost 20,000 rupees and we thought he is going to be in serious trouble now and the Swami was not at all concerned he said I'll raise the money somehow but the thing is what lesson do you take out of it what lesson do you take out of it how do you grow spiritually that's what's important in work not the worldly result that's the difference between worldly work and karma yoga but don't try it with your boss I have grown spiritually boss but about the bottom line the bottom line is dropped out then you are in trouble all right we will go on with this next time Oh chanty shanti shanti hurry he owned that such sri ramakrishna Aparna must this subject will go on from that this 39th verse up to 53rd verse the subject of karma yoga then there'll be a change in subject again when Arjuna will ask the question how do we know a person has become enlightened so by what signs that will be the last topic of this chapter


